        VMD "Visual Molecular Dynamics" 1.8.7beta1 Announcement
        -------------------------------------------------------
The Theoretical and Computational Biophysics group at the Beckman Institute 
for Advanced Science and Technology, the University of Illinois (U-C), 
is proud to announce the public release of VMD 1.8.7beta1.  VMD is a package 
for the visualization and analysis of biomolecular systems.  
VMD includes features for animation of molecular dynamics trajectories, 
interactive simulation, sequence browsing and structure highlighting, 
and powerful scripting capabilities. This software is distributed 
free of charge and includes source code, documentation, and precompiled 
binaries for Linux, MacOS X, Sun, SGI, and Microsoft Windows.
The VMD documentation includes an installation guide, a users guide, and a 
programmers guide for interested researchers.  VMD also provides on-line 
help through the use of an external HTML viewer.  VMD development is 
supported by the NIH National Center for Research Resources.

A full description of VMD is available via the VMD home page:
  http://www.ks.uiuc.edu/Research/vmd/

Release notes, documentation, and download links for the new version 
are available here:
  http://www.ks.uiuc.edu/Research/vmd/vmd-1.8.7/

The authors request that any published work which utilizes VMD includes 
a reference to the VMD web page and/or the following reference:
  Humphrey, W., Dalke, A. and Schulten, K., "VMD - Visual Molecular
  Dynamics", J. Molec. Graphics, 1996, vol. 14, pp. 33-38.

The Theoretical and Computational Biophysics group encourages VMD users 
to be closely  involved in the development process through reporting bugs, 
contributing  fixes, periodical surveys and via other means.

We are eager to hear from you, and thank you for using our software!

                                                John Stone
                                                vmd@ks.uiuc.edu
                                                April 29, 2009

